suppport trait work as patch of workload (#104)
crossplane/oam-kubernetes-runtime: design/trait-separated-from-underlying-workload-should-patch-back.md

        - name: wordpress
          image: wordpress:4.6.1-apache
          ports:
            - containerPort: 80
              name: wordpress
          env:
            - name: TEST_ENV
              value: test
``` 

This will cause a second round of re-create. Again, the canary trait won't work.

There're no doubt too many risks here in this workflow. We can conclude into two problems:

1. Pods can't be re-created several times, all changes of trait in one deploy can only affect pod once.
2. Changes of trait which will affect the underlying workload must trigger new revision and make the canary trait work.

In this proposal, we're going to fix these two problems.

## Goals

1. make sure all changes of workload and trait only will affect underlying workload once.
2. make sure underlying workload change will trigger revision create and trigger rollout/canary trait to work.

## Proposal

The overall idea of this proposal is to merge all traits and patch on the workload only once, and make this action
trigger component revision generated automatically.

To make it more clear, let's define what kind of trait we are talking with first. Let's call them `patch trait`

> for convenience. A trait will be `patch trait` only if it's change will **affect fields of underlying workload**

Reviewer: `fields` here means `spec.template.spec`?

Author: Any fields of workload, `spec.template.spec` leads to the second condition "MUST trigger new revision to do rollout"

# Trait separated from underlying workload should patch back before workload emitted

- Owner: Shibo Li (@ifree613), Jianbo Sun (@wonderflow)
- Date: 07/18/2020
- Status: Draft

## Background

A platform tend to provide simper view to developers. For example, in OAM spec, higher level abstractions like
ContainerizedWorkload are defined to hide unnecessary details of Deployment from developers. At the mean time,
with the concept of separate of concerns, the spec abstracted operational related fields from Deployment into 
several traits in implementation, both of them have CRDs and controllers.

In below example, `securityContext` and `nodeSelector` will be separated as traits.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      securityContext:
        runAsNonRoot: true
      nodeSelector:
        disktype: ssd
      containers:
        - name: wordpress
          image: wordpress:4.6.1-apache
    ...
```

> However, any changes happened to pod template of Deployment will trigger re-create of pods. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, any changes that happen to the pod template of Deployment will trigger a re-creation of pods.
```

> In our current workflow, traits will take effect asynchronously after workload created. That means

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our current workflow, traits take effect asynchronously after the workload is created. That means
```

> a deployment will be created first without these traits' information, and then being updated several times.
> Updating pod template of deployment leads to re-create of pods, which finally makes the Application unstable. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a deployment will be created first without the traits, and its pod template is updated each time a trait is applied.
This type of behavior might not be acceptable in many production environments.
```

like below. It just contains a component with ContainerizedWorkload, and a canary trait.
 
```yaml
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1alpha2
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: example-component
spec:
  workload:
    apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1alpha2
    kind: ContainerizedWorkload
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: wordpress
          image: wordpress:4.6.1-apache
          ports:
            - containerPort: 80
              name: wordpress
          env:
            - name: TEST_ENV
              value: test
---
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1alpha2
kind: ApplicationConfiguration
metadata:
  name: example-appconfig
spec:
  - componentName: example-component
      traits:
        - trait:
            apiVersion: extended.oam.dev/v1alpha2
            kind: Canary
            spec:
              canaryNumber: 1
```

The real running workload is deployment.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: wordpress
          image: wordpress:4.6.1-apache
          ports:
            - containerPort: 80
              name: wordpress
          env:
            - name: TEST_ENV
              value: test
```

> After some time, the App operator want to add two traits on this App for some security reason, and they are both fields
> of underlying Deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After some time, the App operator wants to add two traits on this App for some security reasons, and they are both spec fields in the underlying Deployment.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1alpha2
kind: ApplicationConfiguration
metadata:
  name: example-appconfig
spec:
  components:
    - componentName: example-component
      traits:
        - trait:
            apiVersion: extended.oam.dev/v1alpha2
            kind: Canary
            spec:
              canaryNumber: 1
        - trait:
            apiVersion: extended.oam.dev/v1alpha2
            kind: NodeSelector
            spec:
              disktype: ssd
        - trait:
            apiVersion: extended.oam.dev/v1alpha2
            kind: SecurityContext
            spec:
              runAsNonRoot: true
```

> After AppConfig deployed, NodeSelector and SecurityContext trait will work in a random order.
> Assuming the controller of NodeSelector trait will work first, then it will patch and update the underlying Deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the AppConfig is deployed, NodeSelector and SecurityContext trait will work in random order.
Assuming the controller of NodeSelector trait works first, then it will patch and update the underlying Deployment.
```

whether the patch trait is ready. 

```yaml
apiVersion: extended.oam.dev/v1alpha2
kind: NodeSelector
metadata:
  name: nodeselector-demo
spec:
  disktype: ssd
status:
  patchConfig: nodeselector-cm
  phase: Ready
```

4. The ConfigMap will contain this json-patch information in its `patch` field of data. 

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: nodeselector-cm
data:
  patch: |
    {
      "spec": {
        "template": {
          "spec": {
            "nodeSelector": {
              "disktype": "ssd"
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
```

5. oam-k8s-runtime will periodically check the status of patch trait. If the `phase` of status become `Ready`, the
oam-k8s-runtime will gather the patch data from the ConfigMap. After all patch traits gathered, oam-k8s-runtime will
patch all the information into workload.
 
6. All changes of patch trait will trigger creation of component revision once, and update the status of component,
make the latestRevision to be the newly created one. The rollout/canary trait will work after that.

## Limitations

1. All patch trait will naturally become dependency of workload.

> 2. Operators of all patch trait MUST be written following our guide. (TODO(wonderflow): in the near future, we should

Reviewer 2: Sounds like another thing to check in the appConfig admission webhook
